---
title: "Notes on a Burning Kingdom"
subtitle: "A few thoughts on how the UK could better tackle the climate catastrophe."
date: 2022-07-16
image: '../../assets/images/notes-on-a-burning-kingdom/image-0.jpg'
tags:
- environment
---

Photo by
[Chris LeBoutillier](https://unsplash.com/@chrisleboutillier?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)

London. Saturday, July 16th, 2022. 11:27am. It’s currently 23°C, though BBC Weather
claims that it’ll reach 28°C by 4pm, and Monday and Tuesday will have highs of 39°C.
According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Kingdom_weather_records),
that’s set to be a new temperature record for the UK, with the previous one having been
set in 2019. The Met Office has issued a red weather warning across large parts of
England for both days, and amber warnings across the rest of England, Wales and parts of
Scotland. The warnings are, obviously, for the incoming extreme heatwaves. That’s not
something that’s happened before.

We’ve had heatwaves here, sure. We even had one as earlier this year, but they’ve never
been so bad as to have the national weather service issue warnings about
“population-wide adverse health effects, not limited to those most vulnerable to extreme
heat, leading to serious illness or danger to life.”

That’s pretty dire.

As I sit here typing this, it’s the first time I’ve been grateful to have a bedroom
located mostly underground. The cool, tiled floor is going to be my haven for the next
couple of days, I’m sure. However, all this does make me wonder _why_.

Why is this happening? Why are we so radically unprepared for experiences like this?
Three of the five hottest days in UK history have occurred in the past 7 years, and most
weather data that we have starts around 1910. This isn’t “breaking records”. It’s a
pattern.

Patterns are just a related series of effects, and all effects have causes.

In this case, thankfully, the cause is far too obvious. I’ve recently finished reading
Kim Stanley Robinson’s [_The Ministry for the Future_](https://amzn.to/3vguBPx), a
collection of fictional eyewitness accounts that give us a glimpse of one potential
future if we don’t step up and start tackling the climate crisis sooner rather than
later.

Maybe the book is part of what inspired me to write this piece (some of the ideas below
are certainly inspired by solutions in the book), or maybe it’s just something that’s
been building up in me for a while, but one thing is for sure — there’s a strange irony
in the timing. Robinson’s book begins with a heatwave much like the one rocking the UK
right now. The event takes place in India and results in a death toll of over 20
million. It’s one of two major heatwaves described in the novel, but it acts as the kick
that many global organisations need to get their act together.

Progress towards climate goals is slow, and part of that is the scale of the problem
(which, admittedly, is our fault). Still, it’s mostly down to the inaction and often
counterproductive actions of powerful governments and global organisations.

The UK portrays itself as a global superpower, this ideal utopia with perfect culture, a
great economy and stellar innovation. And yes, we do have a very strong position on the
global stage, but we’re not all that great, and we’re far from a utopia.

Our government is a mess, focusing too hard on the wrong things and not setting climate
goals high enough. Given everything we have and everything we pride ourselves on, we
should be able to do a lot better. Following are a few of my thoughts on changes that
could be made. Some are adjustments to existing action, others new initiatives, but each
could serve as a way to reduce the country’s carbon footprint on a massive scale and
turn the UK into a leader in green living.

I’d just like to preface this with a few things:

- I’m not an economist, politician, policymaker or anyone with the power to implement
  these ideas.
- I’m just a young adult with huge concerns about the future of the planet that my
  generation is going to have to fix.
- I have very… strong views on some of the below issues. Please bear with me and read
  through my arguments before dismissing them out of hand. If you want to disagree with
  me, that’s fine, but let’s have a conversation about it — I want to hear all sides of
  the story.
- The below ideas and suggestions are things I’ve come up with that need to be acted out
  by the big players. They’re not things that can be accomplished by most individuals.
  This doesn’t mean that you can’t contribute. If any of this article resonates with
  you, please speak to your local MPs, spread the word and campaign for the ideas
  within. This is our world to protect.
- Following on from the last point, over the coming weeks and months, I’ll be sharing
  some tips and guidance on how individuals can have an impact too, on as many channels
  as I can find the time for. Keep an eye out for those and share them if you can.

With that out of the way, let’s talk about the big issue first.

### Energy

This is such a big topic that it’s difficult to know where to start, but let’s start
with the wins. According to the ONS,
[renewable energy now accounts for 43.1% of total energy generation in the UK](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1006819/DUKES_2021_Chapter_6_Renewable_sources_of_energy.pdf).
That’s huge, and I’m sure it will keep improving over time. More and more companies will
eventually realise the difficulty they’re going to have selling fossil fuel energy to an
environmentally-conscious population.

On the flip side, the increase in renewable capacity was lower in 2020 than it has been
since 2002 in terms of the percentage change. Part of this is due to COVID-19 and its
effects on the global economy, but part of it is also down to the fact that we have to
rely on big energy corporations to make all of this change happen. It’s remarkably
difficult at the moment for individuals to have control over the source of the energy
used to power their homes. This is something that my first suggestion aims to tackle.

#### Removing roadblocks to solar power

Solar power is the largest energy source on the planet. All of the energy we use is at
least indirectly tied to the big ball of gas burning in the sky. Solar power is also the
easiest way for individuals to contribute to renewable energy generation. All you have
to do is install a few solar panels on your property and voilà, clean energy.

If it’s so easy, then why doesn’t everybody do it? The major factor is cost. Solar
panels are expensive and can cost thousands of pounds per kilowatt of power generated,
and that’s under ideal conditions.

Once solar panels are installed, it’s possible to make recoup some of the cost of the
installation by selling excess energy back to an energy provider through the
[Smart Export Guarantee](https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/environmental-and-social-schemes/smart-export-guarantee-seg)
(SEG). This is a replacement for the previous
[Feed-in or Generation Tariffs](https://www.fitariffs.co.uk/fits/principles/generation/)
(FiT) scheme that ended in 2019, but the downside to the SEG is that the prices are set
by the energy companies you sell the energy to — there’s no flat rate determined by the
government. This means that, if you have solar panels, you’ll have to shop around a bit.

Of course, solar panel owners will also pay a lower energy bill, but even with these
savings, it’s still a large up-front investment.

There are a couple of ways that a good government could go about making solar panels a
more viable option, the first of which would be to offer grants and subsidies for new
solar panel installations. When the FiT scheme first launched, some companies would
offer free solar panels to homes that met certain criteria, but that age is long past.
While it’s true that solar panels have come down in price by about 75% in the past 15–20
years, it’s still not seen as a worthwhile investment for most. This reduction also
means it makes even more sense for the government to pay for new installations, as it’ll
cost them less to do so.

For those not eligible for the grants or subsidies, the government should offer
interest-free loans on new solar installations. This is something that’s been done
previously but stopped in 2015 when it looked like we were likely to meet the EU’s
Renewable Energy Directive target of 20% renewable by 2020.

It’s possible to get low-interest loans from companies like Evo Energy, but there’s
still a cost associated with that. By offering an interest-free loan (perhaps even
offered through banks like the COVID Bounce Back loan was), the government could allow
people to pay for their new installation with the savings on their energy bill and the
income they receive from the SEG.

One of the other major roadblocks to having solar panels installed is permission. Most
buildings in the UK come under the “regular development” bracket for solar panels,
meaning that planning permission isn’t needed provided that the installation adheres to
standard guidelines.

The difficulty comes when looking at protected buildings, such as listed buildings or in
World Heritage Sites. If your home is a listed building, you’ll need to apply for
“listed building consent” (LBC) if you want to install solar panels. This process can be
long and painful, and there are lots of considerations you’ll need to make, such as the
aesthetic of the building, the roof material etc. These laws are in place to preserve
historical buildings and respect their original infrastructure.

This is where I have to bring in one of my aforementioned opinions:

> There’s no point in preserving history to the detriment of our future.

Now, I know that there are going to be a lot of people who don’t like that, and I
understand why. However, I think it’s reasonably self-explanatory — given the choice
between saving the environment and our future, or saving an old building, we should
choose the former _every time_. History has an important role to play in education so
that we don’t repeat past mistakes, but there’s no point in preserving history for a
future generation if there isn’t going to be a future generation.

With this said, the government should mandate that any application (within reason) for
LBC concerning a solar panel installation on the roof of a building be accepted.
Furthermore, other restrictions should be loosened or at the very least carefully
reevaluated. This could make it easier for thousands of people to install solar panels,
and we need that.

#### Wind energy

This is another topic that tends to divide a crowd. Most people see the need for wind
farms and the clean electricity they provide, yet there are still protests every time
plans for an onshore development are drawn up! Why? Because people argue that they spoil
the view.

Well, Gladys, want to know what else spoils the view? _Forest fires_. Again, preserving
the aesthetic of the landscape is all well and good until there’s nobody left to
appreciate it.

On a more serious note, wind, wave and tidal energy combine to make the largest
contributor to the UK’s renewable energy generation. Most of this comes from offshore
wind, but offshore wind farms are significantly harder and more expensive to build than
onshore ones. While it’s true that offshore farms tend to receive stronger winds and
therefore generate more energy, well-positioned onshore farms are still incredibly good
sources of clean electricity that can make a huge difference, especially in more rural
areas where there’s a lot of available space.

My suggestion here is to approve plans for more wind farms and worry about the potential
lower land values later. In my opinion, turbines are incredible feats of engineering
that look fantastic, but plenty of people (usually the older generation) disagree.

Unfortunately for them, times have to change, and the rolling hills of the UK may have
to be dotted with windmills to cope with that. And that’s fine.

### Transport

[Our World in Data](https://ourworldindata.org/emissions-by-sector###energy-electricity-heat-and-transport-73-2)
claims that around 16.2% of global CO2 emissions are from the transport sector. The site
also places transport under the “Energy” category. I do agree that, fundamentally, our
transport issues relate to how we power our vehicles. I’m tackling it separately because
there’s a lot we can do here, starting with road transport.

#### Cars

Again, let’s discuss wins first for this one. Sales of petrol and diesel cars in the UK
will be banned from the year 2030 onwards, creating room and incentive for manufacturers
to start designing electric vehicles (EVs) and (usually hydrogen) fuel cell electric
vehicles (FCEVs). The government is also supporting initiatives to install electric car
chargers in both homes and businesses to further accelerate the transition to
“zero-emission” vehicles. New homes and buildings are required to install charging
points under fairly recent legislation, and the UK’s stance on electric vehicles is
often cited as “world-leading”.

But is there more we could do? Well, yes, of course, there is. There’s always more we
can do. How about bringing forward the deadline to stop selling electric cars from 2030
to 2027, or better yet, 2025? The number of electric vehicle models on the market is
exploding, and consumer choice is improving all the time. Gone are the days when having
an electric car just meant having a Tesla, or if you couldn’t afford one, a Renault Zoe.

And struggling to find a charging point is also quickly becoming a thing of the past.
According to data from [Zap-Map](https://www.zap-map.com/statistics/), there were over
32,000 available chargers in the UK as of the end of June 2022. So, why wait? Stopping
the sales of petrol and diesel vehicles doesn’t mean that they’re going to disappear
from our roads. Seeing these cars on the motorway will likely remain commonplace for at
least another 10 years after sales have stopped, which should provide plenty of time to
slowly build the infrastructure to support the switch.

This would naturally hit manufacturers very hard, but that just means it’s time for
another harsh truth:

> Failure to be an environmentally-friendly company will soon mean the failure of the
> company.

This is something that Big Oil refuses to accept and is lobbying hard to prevent from
becoming a reality. It’s inevitable that sooner or later, consumer habits _will_ change
completely and people will just stop buying their products. This is already underway
with the rise of movements like veganism and the increase in recyclable packaging being
used.

Back to cars: manufacturers with a strong lineup of alternatively-powered vehicles will
do extremely well, as they should. Bringing the switch forwards would likely result in a
shift in market shares away from traditional petrol and diesel manufacturers like Ford
and VW towards more innovative companies like Tesla, Hyundai and Kia. This shift would
stick around for a while. Again, I don’t see a problem with rewarding the companies that
have pushed themselves toward a more sustainable future.

#### Transport of goods

This is a topic that I just want to highlight briefly, but a lot of diesel is burned
transporting goods from factory to shop floor in large lorries, and these are just as
electrifiable as cars and bikes.

Take Lübeck, Germany for example. They’re testing a concept they’re calling the
[eHighway](https://www.ehighway-sh.de/de/). This is a motorway with long overhead power
cables, much like a tram line, that trucks can connect to for clean, electric power.
Even though it’s just a concept at the moment, it goes to show that a bit of creativity
can solve a lot of problems.
[Tom Scott created a great video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_3P_S7pL7Yg)
explaining this in a bit more detail.

#### Public/Mass transport

It’s no secret that public transport is far more environmentally-friendly than personal
transport. A bus or coach can usually carry around 10 times more people than a car but
doesn't use 10 times the energy. The same goes for trains, both overground and under.
The problem with these services is that, unless you’re in a city, they tend to be… less
than ideal ways to get around. They’re usually slow, fairly limited and can be expensive
at times (though probably less than buying fuel at the moment if you’re a solo
traveller).

London is one example of where public transport is great. The underground, while often
complained about, is fantastic, and there are frequent buses as an alternative or for
late-night transport. On top of that, the tube trains are electric and most buses also
run on some sort of clean energy.

So why can’t other cities be the same?

And, apart from cost, there’s also very little reason that buses, overground trains,
trams etc. couldn’t be fitted with solar panels on their roof. This wouldn’t be enough
to power the vehicle completely, but it would allow it to go further on a single charge.

The same logic could also be applied to planes, ferries, boats and so on. Many private
sailing boats are already fitted with solar panels to charge implements on board.

Solar isn’t the only alternative energy source that would work for these vehicles.
Pressure can be turned into electricity by way of
[piezoelectric generators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piezoelectricity) that could be
installed in the floors of trains or ferries. This way, the simple act of people getting
on and off a bus could serve as a way to power the lights inside. It’s little things
like this that could add up to a huge carbon saving if implemented in enough places.

### Economics

“Okay, Isaac,” I hear you say. “This all sounds great, but the global economy is
crashing hard. How is the UK supposed to afford all of this?”

And to that I say: I don’t know. I’m not an economist. I don’t have the full picture and
I can’t make the decisions myself. I can, however, present a few thoughts on suggestions
that have been floating around, so that’s what I’m going to do.

#### Carbon tax

This one is fairly simple to understand. We need to start giving companies a financial
incentive to go green, and I think that a great way to do that is to charge them more
and more the longer they insist on burning carbon.

The carbon tax would be a progressive tax that increases over time and would tax
corporations based on their CO2 emissions for a given year. This would require stringent
monitoring at both the company and national levels and it would certainly not be an easy
task.

The increased costs would naturally propagate down to the consumer, but as long as
that’s reasonably well managed, I don’t think that’s too much of an issue either. It
would dissuade consumers from buying products with high associated emissions and steer
them towards greener alternatives in the long run.

The other side of this coin would be tax relief for carbon sequestration (removal and
storage). There’s a huge buzz about “carbon offset this” and “carbon offset that” at the
moment, and companies are paying good money to make themselves appear carbon neutral by
effectively paying someone else not to emit the same amount of carbon.

> Carbon offset is bullshit.

At the end of the day, CO2 is still being emitted into the atmosphere. These large
corporations should instead be investing in projects that _remove_ CO2 from the
atmosphere. Ideally, more than they generate. It’s more expensive, yes, but also far
more effective. Companies that invest in carbon removal should be rewarded with some
kind of tax relief, and companies that do the removal themselves should be rewarded even
more heavily. Every stick needs a carrot to balance it out, and this is a great
opportunity for cleantech to prevail and grow.

---

If you’ve read to here, thank you so much for putting up with my ranting and sticking
with me. I hope I’ve convinced you that there’s a lot more we could be doing as a
country. If anything I’ve said resonates with you, please spread the word! I’d also love
to hear your thoughts on everything above, regardless of your stance on each matter.

If you want to start making changes to your own life to try and live in a bit more of an
environmentally-friendly way, I’m going to be sharing a few thoughts and guidelines on
how to do that without having too much of an impact on your day-to-day soon. There are
lots of big things you can do that make a massive environmental impact like going vegan
or walking everywhere, but I’m going to be focusing on smaller changes you can make
without having to alter your lifestyle too much or completely uproot yourself.

If that sounds interesting to you, please keep an eye out on my social channels, and
perhaps even sign up for [my newsletter](https://isaacharrisholt.com/newsletter). It’s
been fairly… dead recently, but I want to get some of the ideas in my head out into the
world, and a newsletter means they come straight to the people that want them most.

I do hope this has given you some food for thought. I hope to meet you in a cleaner
world someday, free of heatwaves and plastic oceans. I really do.

— Isaac

