---
title: 'Python: To OOP or to FP?'
subtitle: 'That is the question'
date: 2022-11-21
image: '../../assets/images/python-to-oop-or-to-fp/image-0.jpg'
tags:
  - python
---

Photo by
[Susan Holt Simpson](https://unsplash.com/@shs521?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)

Programmers can never agree on anything, but by far one of the biggest arguments that
constantly plagues the interwebs is the battle between object-oriented programming (OOP)
and functional programming (FP).

As a reminder, OOP revolves around wrapping all your business logic and data in classes,
which can then create objects that share the same functionality. It also includes
concepts such as inheritance and polymorphism, which make it easier to have classes with
similar, but slightly altered functionality.

The language usually used to demonstrate OOP is Java. In Java, everything must be
wrapped in a class, including your program’s main execution loop.

Functional programming, on the other hand, is more concerned with — you guessed it —
functions. In functional programming, data is often piped from function to function,
each performing an operation on the data. Functions are often designed to produce the
exact same output if given the same input.

The most popular functional programming languages are Clojure, Elixir and Haskell.

### But what about Python?

Python is an interesting case. It shares a lot of the common features of object-oriented
languages, allowing you to create classes and inherit from superclasses, but it also has
functionality that you’d normally see in functional languages. You’re allowed to define
functions in the main body of the program, and functions are also first-class citizens,
meaning you can pass them about as objects.

The truth is, Python is very flexible. If you’re coming from Java and want to write
everything in a purely object-oriented style, you’ll be able to accomplish most of the
things you want. If you’re a previous Clojure developer, you won’t have too much trouble
replicating FP patterns in Python either.

However, the beauty of Python is that you’re not restricted to either way of doing
things. You can use features of both paradigms to create readable, extensible code that
will keep your codebase maintainable, even as it grows.

Below are three examples of the same (very simple) program written in OOP, FP and a more
Pythonic mixture of both. I’ll highlight the strengths and weaknesses of each one, which
should give you a good base when architecting your next Python project.

### The program

The program used to demonstrate is very simple — it creates two animals (a dog and a
fish) and has them perform some very simple actions. In this example, the actions just
log to `stdout`, but they could obviously do a lot more.

#### OOP example

```python
from abc import ABC, abstractmethod

class Logger(ABC):
    @abstractmethod
    def log(self, message: str):
        ...

class MyLogger(Logger):
    def __init__(self, name: str):
        self.name = name

    def log(self, message: str):
        print(f'{self.name}: {message}')

class Animal:
    def __init__(self, name: str, logger: Logger):
        self.name = name
        self.logger = logger

    def speak(self):
        self.logger.log('Speaking')
        ...

class Dog(Animal):
    def speak(self):
        self.logger.log('Woof!')
        ...

    def run(self):
        self.logger.log('Running')
        ...

class Fish(Animal):
    ...

class App:
    @staticmethod
    def run():
        fido = Dog(name='Fido', logger=MyLogger('Fido'))
        goldie = Fish(name='Goldie', logger=MyLogger('Goldie'))

        fido.speak()
        fido.run()
        goldie.speak()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    App.run()

# Fido: Woof!
# Fido: Running
# Goldie: Speaking
```

As you can see, the code creates a `MyLogger` class for logging events to `stdout` , an
`Animal` base class and then `Dog` and `Fish` classes for more specific animals.

To follow the OOP paradigm a little more closely, it also defines an `App` class with a
single method `run` that runs the program.

The nice thing about OOP and inheritance is that we didn’t have to define a `speak`
method on the `Fish` class and it’ll still be able to speak.

However, if we wanted to have more animals that could run, we’d have to introduce a
`RunningAnimal` class between `Animal` and `Dog` that defines the `run` method, and
potentially a similar `SwimmingAnimal` class for `Fish` , but then our hierarchies start
getting more and more complicated.

Also, the `MyLogger` and `App` classes are pretty much useless here. Each does only one
thing and actually makes the code slightly less readable. These would be better pulled
out into a `log` and a `main` (or `run`) function.

We’ve also had to create a `Logger` abstract base class purely so that the code can be
properly type hinted and allow users of our API to pass in other loggers if they want to
log to somewhere other than `stdout`, or if they wanted to log with a different format.

#### FP example

Just a head’s up — I’m less familiar with FP than OOP, so this might not be the most
FP-like way to implement this behaviour, but it’s what I’m going with.

```python
import functools
from typing import Callable

Logger = Callable[[str], None]

def log(message: str, name: str):
    print(f'{name}: {message}')

def bark( name: str,
    log_fn: Logger,) -> (str, Logger):
    log_fn('Woof!')
    return name, log_fn

def run( name: str,
    log_fn: Logger,) -> (str, Logger):
    log_fn('Running')
    return name, log_fn

def speak( name: str,
    log_fn: Logger,) -> (str, Logger):
    log_fn('Speaking')
    return name, log_fn

def main():
    run(
        *bark(
            'Fido',
            functools.partial(log, name='Fido'),
        ),
    )

    speak(
        'Goldie',
        functools.partial(log, name='Goldie'),
    )

if __name__ == '__main__':
 main()

# Fido: Woof!
# Fido: Running
# Goldie: Speaking
```

Off the bat, we can see that our `Logger` class has just become a handy type alias for
`Callable[[str], None]`. We’ve also defined a `log` function to deal with our printing.
Instead of defining classes for our animals, we’ve simply defined functions that take in
the name of an animal and a `Logger` function.

You’ll notice that the `run`, `speak`, and `bark` functions also all return their name
and logging function arguments to allow them to be composed together into pipelines as
we’ve done for `run` and `bark` for Fido.

We’ve also moved our logic into a `main` function, removing the need to define an entire
class just to run our program.

To get around the fact that our `log` function doesn’t match the `Logger` type, we’re
using`functools.partial` to create a partial function that does match. This allows us to
replace our logger with anything we like, as long as we can use a partial function to
reduce it so that it matches our `Logger` type.

However, since we’re not encapsulating the data in anything, if we wanted to add more
attributes to our animals, we’d probably have to start using `dict` objects to represent
them and pass those around, but then there’s always a worry that the dictionary is
created incorrectly, and thus is missing a key that’s relied on in one of our functions.

To get around _that_, we’d need to create initialiser functions for our animals, at
which point the code gets messier and messier again.

#### A little bit of both

So, what would happen if we were to combine a bit of OOP with a bit of FP? I’m going to
bring in a few more Pythonic bits and pieces to pull away from the traditional OOP and
FP paradigms, and hopefully make the code a little cleaner and easier to read.

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass
from functools import partial
from typing import Callable

Logger = Callable[[str], None]

def log(message: str, name: str):
    print(f'{name}: {message}')

@dataclass
class Animal:
    name: str
    log: Logger

    def speak(self):
        self.log('Speaking')

@dataclass
class Dog(Animal):
    breed: str = 'Labrador'

    def speak(self):
        self.log('Woof!')

    def run(self):
        self.log('Running')

@dataclass
class Fish(Animal):
    ...

def main():
    fido = Dog('Fido', partial(log, name='Fido'))
    goldie = Fish('Goldie', partial(log, name='Goldie'))

    fido.speak()
    fido.run()

    goldie.speak()

if __name__ == '__main__':
 main()

# Fido: Woof!
# Fido: Running
# Goldie: Speaking
```

In this example, I’m using Pythons `dataclasses` module to avoid having to write
constructors for my classes. This not only reduces some of the code I need to write but
also makes it a lot easier to add new attributes down the line if I need to.

Similar to the OOP example, we have an `Animal` base class with `Dog` and `Fish`
subclasses. However, like in the FP example, I’m using the `Logger` type alias and
`functools.partial` to create the loggers for the animals. This is made easier by
Python’s support for functions as first-class citizens.

Also, the `main` function is just a function. I’ll never understand why Java is how Java
is.

### Mixing OOP and FP in production

Okay, so I’ll admit that this example was incredibly basic, and while it served as a
good starting point for this discussion, I’d now like to give you an example of how
these concepts are used in production, and I’m going to use two of my favourite Python
libraries: [FastAPI](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) and
[Pydantic](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/). FastAPI is a lightweight API framework
for Python, and Pydantic is a data validation and settings management library.

I’m not going to go into these libraries in detail, but Pydantic effectively allows you
to define data structures using Python classes, and then validate incoming data and
access it via object attributes. This means you don’t run into the problems that stem
from working with dictionaries, and you always know that your data is in the format
you’d expect.

FastAPI allows you to define your API routes as functions, wrapping each one with a
decorator (which is a very FP-like concept) to encapsulate your logic.

Below is an example of how this might be used. Again, it’s a simple example, but it’s
fairly representative of what you might see in production.

```python
from fastapi import FastAPI
from pydantic import BaseModel

app = FastAPI()

class Baz(BaseModel):
    qux: int

class Foo(BaseModel):
    bar: str
    baz: Baz

@app.get('/foo')
async def get_foo(name: str, age: int) -> Foo:
    ...  # Some logic here
    return Foo(
        bar=name,
        baz=Baz(qux=age),
    )

# GET /foo?name=John&age=42
# {
#   "bar": "John",
#   "baz": {
#     "qux": 42
#   }
# }
```

As you can see, FastAPI uses Pydantic’s ability to convert nested objects to JSON to
create a JSON response for our endpoint. The `app.get` decorator has also registered our
`get_foo` function with the `app` object, allowing us to make `GET` requests to the
`/foo` endpoint.

I hope you’ve found this article helpful. I’d love to hear what you think, and which
paradigm you lean towards when writing Python.

Obviously, this isn’t the only way to combine FP and OOP in Python, and there are plenty
of design patterns that can be implemented and improved upon using this sort of
combination.

I’ll be writing about those in the future. I also tweet about
Python and my current projects on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/IsaacHarrisHolt), and
(more recently) post about them on [Mastodon](https://fosstodon.org/@isaacharrisholt)
too.

I’m sure I’ll see you soon!

\- Isaac
